[Music]
cornwall
the most southerly point of the uk
known for its spectacular coastline
surrounded by open ocean
it's here that dedicated organizations
are fighting to protect one of britain's
most
iconic species
[Applause]
[Music]
around the uk coastline during our
winter months one of our much-loved
marine mammals hauls out onto beaches to
give birth
now these beaches are of vital
importance because the uk is home
to nearly half the world's population of
this species
and that is the grey seal
the grey seal is one of the rarest
sealed species on earth
and the uk has a globally important
population
they're known to have exceptional senses
such as
eyesight hearing and highly sensitive
whiskers
which they use to detect movements
underwater but also
communicate with
much like the human fingerprint they
have unique fur patterns which they will
have for their entire lives
sadly this charismatic species is under
increasing pressure from human
impact we've traveled to cornwall to
meet dan jarvis
from british divers marine life rescue
an
organisation that works hard to protect
marine mammals across the uk
we have volunteers who are trained all
the way around the country who are
available to respond to
seals who are called into our hotline
that may or may not need our help
we deal with a number of animals that
have various injuries and illnesses as
well but also a few that are entangled
too
when we locate the seal on the beat
we'll usually monitor it first
do things like breathing rate before we
actually start handling the animal and
disturbing it
if we can see there's a problem with the
animal we'll go hands-on with it with a
towel
restrain it safely so that we can handle
the animal take
temperature check for any injuries or
signs of infections things like that
we can pop it into our seal bag as well
and weigh it so we can get an accurate
measurement of that and
based on its age that might also tell us
whether it's severely malnourished for
example or
if it's okay and we can also tube feed
it as well give it some rehydration
fluids some of the animals that we come
across are quite dehydrated and skinny
and really exhausted as well so to have
that early perk up before we take it
into a rehabilitation center really can
help while they're in transport seeing
more animals from entanglement as well
there's more again public awareness of
the issue and more people reporting it
when they see it
sometimes it's a case of seeing an
animal that is completely unaccessible
unfortunately and we can't actually get
to it it's down a big cliff but
sometimes they do come up onto beaches
that are accessible
when seals cannot be immediately
released back into the water
and are in need of further medical
treatment they are taken to
rehabilitation centers
so we visited the cornish seal sanctuary
in greek
to find out more about the
rehabilitation process
we joined megan gunnell an animal care
worker at the sanctuary
to have a closer look at the work they
do
[Music]
can you tell us a little bit about
joker's story and how he got bought into
you
yeah so like most of the pups that we
get it's a member of the public that
spotted them
and then we either get a call or british
divers marine life rescue
get a call in this case it was their
volunteers who were actually able to get
down to him
on little feast draw beach in newquay
they got there really really quickly and
it's really important in a
net entangled seal case which is what
joker was
to actually get there as fast as
possible because you don't want them to
actually
go back in the water once they're back
in the water you can't really do a lot
for the grey seals they are a globally
rare species
even though they do have quite a big
population down in cornwall and in the
uk
we feel like the conservation effort for
them is to actually just let them have
a natural life without being interfered
from marine
litter from public disturbance and just
generally not getting in their way
when we first get a puppy and we do a
thorough check of
everything so nose to flipper and at
that point we sort of make a note of
where its injuries are and then at least
once a day
usually twice depending on the severity
of the wounds we will clean them
and this is a really important process
because it lets us know every day we're
checking them and we're seeing if
actually the treatment is working
because a lot of the time they're
infected
and we need to sort of clean them out so
that they can heal properly so we just
look to see if the treatment is to carry
on if we need to call our vet and change
anything
when a seal requires additional medical
care such as wound cleaning
megan is accompanied by zoe morris an
animal care assistant
ensuring the process is as efficient and
quick as possible
once seals are past the critical stage
they are moved to a separate part of the
hospital
where they are monitored and fed a
strict diet to ensure that they get back
up to a healthy weight
so we have to um move our boots because
we're actually going into a hospital
area now
and this is just to stop any pathogens
getting in that shouldn't
be there for the seals and in case it's
spreading disease
the rehabilitation process is around the
clock operation
each year the sanctuary brings in
between 50 to 80 pups
and with a wide range of issues from
entanglement to malnourishment
the expertise and experience of the team
give the seals the best possible
chance of being released back into the
wild
[Music]
later that day we received an urgent
call from dan with the reported seal
stranded on a nearby beach
so we jumped in the car to join the team
of marine medics at the scene
so a rescue's just coming and we're here
with the marine medics now and we're
going to go and see how it's doing
it's just up here
the first thing that happens in a rescue
is dan will do what is called
jumping the seal placing a towel over
its eyes
making the process as least stressful as
possible for the seal
they will then perform a full health
check checking the seal's temperature
and looking for any visible wounds or
injuries
the team found this seal to be
dehydrated and the quickest way to get
fluids into its system
is by tube feeding the marine medics
worked quickly and efficiently to
complete
all of the necessary procedures and then
make a welcoming decision so
thankfully there doesn't seem to be
anything wrong well
wrong enough to take the seal into a
rehab center
so the team are going to release it back
out onto the beach now
and hopefully she goes straight back
into the water
the seal is moved quickly to the far end
of the beach away from the public and
close enough to the water
giving it the option to go back into the
ocean if it decides to
the seal is carefully placed down on the
beach and
after unzipping the bag the medics
immediately give it a wide berth
and after having a look at its
surroundings
this young seal instantly heads to the
shoreline
swimming back out into the open ocean
giving the entire team
a successful and happy ending
thankfully this female seal went
straight back into the water
after being in the bag and having a full
health check and
not all stories end like this but it
just goes to show the importance of what
people are doing around the cornish
coast to help protect seals
and getting animals back into the wild
where they belong
thanks to uk wide organizations and
committed individuals
the uk continues to play a vital part in
taking care of the globally important
population of grey seals
with their steadfast approach of
rehabilitating and releasing these
animals
the uk will continue to play a crucial
role
in grey seal conservation
[Music]
you